# Migrate to community packages

## Change the url in the packages

Change the url from  

```txt
xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/XXXXXX
```

to

```txt
xpkg.crossplane.io/crossplane-contrib/XXXXXX
```

!!! danger "Only change the url, do not rename the provider because it can remove all your managed resources"

Notes:

- Use a pinned package version, like v2.3.0
- Use the same pinned versions in all the packages from the same family
- Do not declare the family provider. It will be installed as dependency

### Fix the provider deployment

This will fail because the lock can have old dependencies and the old family provider can be there

- Recreate the dependencies

Remove the lock

```shell
kubectl delete locks.pkg.crossplane.io lock
```

- Remove the old family provider

Remove the family provider with the  xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/

```shell
kubectl get providers.pkg.crossplane.io
kubectl delete providers.pkg.crossplane.io XXX
```

### Remove the owner of the providerconfig CRD

This will permit the new provider family own the crd

For example, for aws providers

```shell
kubectl patch crd providerconfigs.aws.m.upbound.io --type=json -p='[{"op":"remove","path":"/metadata/ownerReferences"}]'
```

## Fix the providerconfig

If the ProviderConfigs are stuck in a terminating state, it means the `in-use.crossplane.io`
finalizer is being held by existing `ProviderConfigUsage` objects.

`ProviderConfigUsage` objects are auto-generated by the managed resource controller to track
which managed resources reference a given ProviderConfig. They are **not** GitOps-managed
resources. Deleting them:

- Does **not** delete managed resources (IAM Roles, Policies, etc.)
- Does **not** delete any cloud resources
- Only removes the lock that holds the ProviderConfig finalizer

For example, for AWS providers:

```shell
kubectl delete providerconfigusages.aws.m.upbound.io -A --all
```

!!! warning "The command above may not clear all namespaces at once"
    If some ProviderConfigs remain stuck, delete per namespace:

```shell
kubectl delete providerconfigusages.aws.m.upbound.io -n <namespace> --all
```

Once the usages are removed, the ProviderConfigs complete their deletion and ArgoCD recreates
them automatically from the git manifests.

### Remove stuck finalizers

If a ProviderConfig still has the `in-use.crossplane.io` finalizer after all its
ProviderConfigUsages have been deleted (the controller did not reconcile it), remove the
finalizer directly:

```shell
kubectl patch providerconfig.<group> <name> -n <namespace> \
  --type=json -p='[{"op":"remove","path":"/metadata/finalizers/0"}]'
```

After the finalizer is removed, Kubernetes completes the deletion and ArgoCD recreates the
ProviderConfig from git.

!!! note "The new community provider supports both API groups"
    The `crossplane-contrib/provider-family-aws` package manages both
    `providerconfigs.aws.m.upbound.io` (namespaced) and `providerconfigs.aws.upbound.io`
    (cluster-scoped) CRDs. There is no need to migrate existing managed resources or
    ProviderConfig manifests to a different API group.
